Edit for redundant information and sections across Data Prepper (#7127)
opensearch-project/documentation-website: _data-prepper/pipelines/expression-syntax.md

#### Shorthand syntax

The shorthand syntax for a JSON pointer can be expressed using the following regular expression pattern, where `\w` represents any word character (A--Z, a-z, 0--9, or underscore):

```
/\w+(/\w+)*`
```
{% include copy-curl.html %}
 

The following is an example of this shorthand syntax:

```
/Hello/World/0
```
{% include copy-curl.html %}

#### Escaped syntax

The escaped syntax for a JSON pointer can be expressed as follows:

```
"/<Valid String Characters | Escaped Character>(/<Valid String Characters | Escaped Character>)*"
```
{% include copy-curl.html %}

The following is an example of an escaped JSON pointer:

```
# Path
# { "Hello - 'world/" : [{ "\"JsonPointer\"": true }] }
"/Hello - 'world\//0/\"JsonPointer\""
```
{% include copy-curl.html %}

### Literals

Literals are fundamental values that have no children. Data Prepper supports the following literal types: 

- **Float:** Supports values from 3.40282347 x 10^38 to 1.40239846 x 10^-45.

> - **Integer:** Supports values from -2,147,483,648 to 2,147,483,647.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Integer: Supports values from -2,147,483,648 to 2,147,483,647.
```

> - **Boolean:** Supports `true` or `false`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Boolean: Supports `true` or `false`.
```

> - **JSON pointer:** See [JSON pointers](#json-pointers) for more information.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- JSON pointer: See [JSON pointers](#json-pointers) for more information.
```

> - **String:** Supports valid Java strings.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- String: Supports valid Java strings.
```

> - **Null:** Supports `null` to check if a JSON pointer exists.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Null: Supports `null` to check if a JSON pointer exists.
```

layout: default
title: Expression syntax
parent: Pipelines
nav_order: 5
---

# Expression syntax  

Expressions provide flexibility in data manipulation, filtering, and routing in Data Prepper. The following sections provide information about expression syntax in Data Prepper.

## Key terms

The following key terms are used in the context of expressions:

Term | Definition
-----|-----------

> **Expression** | A generic component that contains a primary or an operator. Expressions can be nested withing other expressions. An expression's imminent children can contain 0–1 operators.

Reviewer 2: A "primary" is defined below, as is an "operator." It would make sense to italicize those.

It may help to see how it is formatted in the original source. You'll see they italicize these terms and that makes it clearer.

https://github.com/opensearch-project/data-prepper/blob/main/docs/expression_syntax.md#definitions

> **Expression** | A generic component that contains a primary or an operator. Expressions can be nested withing other expressions. An expression's imminent children can contain 0–1 operators.

Reviewer 2: I think "immediate" fits here.

> **Expression string** | The highest priority in a Data Prepper expression and supports only one expression string that results in a return value. An expression string is not the same as an expression.

Reviewer 2: A "primary" is defined below, as is an "operator." It would make sense to italicize those.

It may help to see how it is formatted in the original source. You'll see they italicize these terms and that makes it clearer.

https://github.com/opensearch-project/data-prepper/blob/main/docs/expression_syntax.md#definitions

> **Expression string** | The highest priority in a Data Prepper expression and supports only one expression string that results in a return value. An expression string is not the same as an expression.

Reviewer 2: This is the priority of evaluating the expression tree when parsing.

**Literal** | A fundamental value that has no children. A literal can be one of the following: float, integer, Boolean, JSON pointer, string, or null. See [Literals](#literals).
**Operator** | A hardcoded token that identifies the operation used in an expression.
**Primary** | Can be one of the following: set initializer, priority expression, or literal.
**Statement** | The highest-priority component within an expression string.

## Operators

The following table lists the supported operators. Operators are listed in order of precedence (top to bottom, left to right).

| Operator             | Description                                           | Associativity |
|----------------------|-------------------------------------------------------|---------------|
| `()`                 | Priority expression                                   | left-to-right |
| `not`<br> `+`<br>  `-`| Unary logical NOT<br>Unary positive<br>Unary negative | right-to-left |
| `<`, `<=`, `>`, `>=` | Relational operators                                  | left-to-right |
| `==`, `!=`           | Equality operators                                    | left-to-right |

> | `and`, `or`          | Conditional expression                                | left-to-right |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| `and`, `or`          | Conditional expressions                                | left-to-right |
```

### Relational operators

Relational operators compare numeric values or JSON pointers that resolve to numeric values. The operators are used to test the relationship between two operands, determining if one is greater than, less than or equal to the other. The syntax for using relational operators is as follows:

```
<Number | JSON Pointer> < <Number | JSON Pointer>
<Number | JSON Pointer> <= <Number | JSON Pointer>
<Number | JSON Pointer> > <Number | JSON Pointer>
<Number | JSON Pointer> >= <Number | JSON Pointer>
```
{% include copy-curl.html %}

> For example, to check if the vlaue of the `status_code` field in an event is within the range of successful HTTTP responses (200 to 299), you can use the following expression:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For example, to check if the value of the `status_code` field in an event is within the range of successful HTTP responses (200 to 299), you can use the following expression:
```

```
/status_code >= 200 and /status_code < 300
```
{% include copy-curl.html %}

### Equality operators

Equality operators are used to test whether two values are equivalent. These operators compare values of any type, including JSON pointers, literals, and expressions. The syntax for using equality operators is as follows: 

```
<Any> == <Any>
<Any> != <Any>
```
{% include copy-curl.html %}

The following are some examples of using equality operators:

- `/is_cool == true`: Checks if the value referenced by the JSON pointer is equal to the Boolean value.
- `3.14 != /status_code`: Checks if the numeric value is not equal to the value referenced by the JSON pointer.
- `{1, 2} == /event/set_property`: Checks is the array is equal to the value referenced by the JSON pointer. 

### Conditional expressions

Conditional expressions allow you to combine multiple expressions or values using logical operators to create more complex evaluation criteria. The available conditional operators are `and`, `or`, and `not`. The syntax for using these conditional operators is as follows:

```
<Any> and <Any>
<Any> or <Any>
not <Any>
```
{% include copy-curl.html %}

> The following are some examples of using conditional expressions: 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The following is an example of using conditional expressions: 
```

## Syntax components

Syntax components are the building blocks of expressions in Data Prepper. They allow you to define sets, specify evaluation order, reference values within events, use literal values, and follow specific white space rules. Understanding these components is crucial for creating and working with expressions effectively in Data Prepper pipelines.

### Priority expressions

Priority expressions specify the order of evaluation of expressions. They are enclosed in parentheses `()`. Priority expressions must contain an expression or value (empty parentheses are not supported). The following is an example:

```
/is_cool == (/name == "Steven")
```
{% include copy-curl.html %}

### JSON pointers

JSON pointers are used to reference values within an event. They start with a leading forward slash `/` followed by alphanumeric characters or underscores, separated by additional forward slashes `/`. 

> JSON pointers can use an extended character set by wrapping the entire pointer in double quotes `""` and escaping characters using the backslash `\`. Note that the `~` and `/` characters are considered part of the pointer path and do not need to be escaped. Here are some examples of valid JSON pointers: `~0` to represent the literal character `~` or `~1` to represent the literal character `/`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
JSON pointers can use an extended character set by wrapping the entire pointer in double quotes `""` and escaping characters using the backslash `\`. Note that the `~` and `/` characters are considered part of the pointer path and do not need to be escaped. 

The following are examples of valid JSON pointers: 

- `~0` to represent the literal character 
- `~` or `~1` to represent the literal character `/`
```

#### Shorthand syntax

The shorthand syntax for a JSON pointer can be expressed using the following regular expression pattern:

```
/\w+(/\w+)*`
```
{% include copy-curl.html %}
 
 Where `\w` represents any word character (A--Z, a-z, 0--9, or underscore).

Here is an example of this shorthand syntax:

```
/Hello/World/0
```
{% include copy-curl.html %}

#### Escaped syntax

The escaped syntax for a JSON pointer can be expressed as follows:

```
"/<Valid String Characters | Escaped Character>(/<Valid String Characters | Escaped Character>)*"
```
{% include copy-curl.html %}

Here is an example of an escaped JSON pointer:

```
# Path
# { "Hello - 'world/" : [{ "\"JsonPointer\"": true }] }
"/Hello - 'world\//0/\"JsonPointer\""
```
{% include copy-curl.html %}

### Literals

Literals are fundamental values that have no children. Data Prepper supports the following literal types: 

> - **Float:** Supports values from 3.40282347 x 10^38 to 1.40239846 x 10^-45.

Reviewer: No.

<Number | JSON Pointer> >= <Number | JSON Pointer>
```

For example, to check if the vlaue of the `status_code` field in an event is within the range of successful HTTTP responses (200 to 299), you can use the following expression:

```
/status_code >= 200 and /status_code < 300
```

### Equality operators

Equality operators are used to test whether two values are equivalent. These operators compare values of any type, including JSON pointers, literals, and expressions. The syntax for using equality operators is as follows: 

```
<Any> == <Any>
<Any> != <Any>
```

> Here are some examples of using equality operators:

Author: ```suggestion
The following are some examples of using equality operators:
```

- `/is_cool == true`: Checks if the value referenced by the JSON pointer is equal to the Boolean value.
- `3.14 != /status_code`: Checks if the numeric value is not equal to the value referenced by the JSON pointer.
- `{1, 2} == /event/set_property`: Checks is the array is equal to the value referenced by the JSON pointer. 

### Conditional expressions

Conditional expressions allow you to combine multiple expressions or values using logical operators to create more complex evaluation criteria. The available conditional operators are `and`, `or`, and `not`. The syntax for using these conditional operators is as follows:

```
<Any> and <Any>
<Any> or <Any>
not <Any>
```

> The following are examples of using conditional expressions: 

Author: ```suggestion
The following are some examples of using conditional expressions: 
```

```

> /status_code == 200 and /message == "Hello world"

Author: Should we explain the use like we do for equality operators above?

Reviewer 2: I don't know if this is necessary. It is fairly standard boolean logic.

/response != null
```

### Reserved symbols

Reserved symbols refer to a set of symbols that are not currently used in the expression syntax but are reserved for possible future functionality or extensions. The reserved symbols include `^`, `*`, `/`, `%`, `+`, `-`, `xor`, `=`, `+=`, `-=`, `*=`, `/=`, `%=`, `++`, `--`, and `${<text>}`.

## Syntax components

Syntax components are the building blocks of expressions in Data Prepper. They allow you to define sets, specify evaluation order, reference values within events, use literal values, and follow specific white space rules. Understanding these components is crucial for creating and working with expressions effectively in Data Prepper pipelines.

> ### Set initializers

Reviewer 2: These (set initializers) don't actually work. We should remove them from the documentation.

| `and`, `or`, `not`   | Conditional operators    | Yes                  | `/a<300 and /b>200`                                            | `/b<300and/b>200`                     |
| `,`                  | Set value delimiter      | No                   | `/a in {200, 202}`<br>`/a in {200,202}`<br>`/a in {200 , 202}` | `/a in {200,}`                        |

## Functions

Data Prepper supports the following built-in functions that can be used in an expression.

> ### `length()`

Reviewer 2: I think we should keep this format because of the complexity.

And honestly, I'd like to move toward using sub-pages for functions, similar to what we do for processors.

```
Functions
  cidrContains
  contains
  getMetadata
  hasTags
  join
  length
```

Reviewer 3: Do we plan on adding additional functions at @dlvenable? I originally had them as section in the functions page so that they were link-able, however, I'm not sure there's enough info on each individual function to justify sub-pages, unless we plan on adding more information to each.

Author: Moved to subpages.

Reviewer 2: @Naarcha-AWS , Yes, this is something we plan to expand upon and there may be many more.

@vagimeli , Thank you for making sub-pages!
